.\" Man page for check-lid
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-only
.\"
.TH CHECK-LID 1 "January 2026" "check-lid" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
check-lid \- query laptop lid state for PAM authentication
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B check-lid
[\fB\-v\fR|\fB\-\-verbose\fR]
[\fB\-V\fR|\fB\-\-version\fR]
[\fB\-h\fR|\fB\-\-help\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B check-lid
is a PAM helper utility that queries the laptop lid state via the systemd-logind
D-Bus API. It is designed to be used with PAM rules to skip fingerprint
authentication when the laptop lid is closed (clamshell mode with external monitors).
.PP
The utility connects to the system D-Bus and queries the \fBLidClosed\fR property
from \fBorg.freedesktop.login1.Manager\fR. A timeout is enforced to prevent
blocking PAM authentication indefinitely.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output. Logs messages to both stderr and syslog.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help message and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Exit codes are designed for PAM compatibility:
.TP
.B 0
Lid is \fBCLOSED\fR. PAM interprets this as success, which can be used to skip
subsequent authentication modules (e.g., fingerprint).
.TP
.B 1
Lid is \fBOPEN\fR or an error occurred. PAM interprets this as failure/ignore,
allowing authentication to proceed normally.
.SH PAM INTEGRATION
Add the following to your PAM configuration (e.g., \fI/etc/pam.d/sudo\fR):
.PP
.RS
.nf
auth    [success=1 default=ignore]    pam_exec.so quiet /usr/local/bin/check-lid
auth    sufficient                     pam_fprintd.so
auth    required                       pam_unix.so
.fi
.RE
.PP
When the lid is closed, \fBcheck-lid\fR returns 0 (success), causing PAM to skip
the next module (fingerprint). When open, it returns 1, and fingerprint
authentication proceeds normally.
.SH LOGGING
.B check-lid
logs to syslog using the \fBLOG_AUTH\fR facility with program identifier
"check-lid". Use \fBjournalctl\fR to view logs:
.PP
.RS
journalctl -t check-lid --since "10 minutes ago"
.RE
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.B check-lid
requires:
.IP \(bu 2
systemd (for sd-bus D-Bus API)
.IP \(bu 2
systemd-logind service running
.SH SECURITY
.IP \(bu 2
Runs as the calling user (no privilege escalation)
.IP \(bu 2
Only reads lid state via D-Bus (no system modifications)
.IP \(bu 2
Built with security-hardened compiler flags (stack protector, PIE, RELRO, FORTIFY_SOURCE)
.IP \(bu 2
Fail-safe design: errors return exit code 1 (proceed with normal authentication)
.IP \(bu 2
D-Bus calls have a 5-second timeout to prevent blocking
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/pam.d/*
PAM service configuration files where check-lid can be integrated.
.SH EXAMPLES
Test manually:
.PP
.RS
.nf
check-lid && echo "Lid closed" || echo "Lid open"
check-lid --verbose
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pam (7),
.BR pam.d (5),
.BR pam_exec (8),
.BR pam_fprintd (8),
.BR systemd-logind (8)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/shini4i/pam-lid-block/issues
.SH AUTHOR
Written by shini4i.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 shini4i.
License GPLv3: GNU GPL version 3 <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
.PP
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
